**Abstract**

The human body system is an open, complex and self-organized giant system. It involves not only multi-scale coupling within the individual but also cross-scale interactions with external groups. Facing the challenge of this complexity requires a methodological breakthrough. Based on the philosophical picture that human body owns a ‘single-centered, two-sided, multi-dimensional, multi-level’ structure, this study introduces the idea of order parameters which originated from Landau and developed by the Structural Ensemble Dynamics of turbulence to human complex systems, aiming to develop a symmetry-based theory of human order parameters. And this article applies it to two types of realistic human complex systems, the population evolution of COVID-19 and the individual analysis of pulse waves.

Applying the theory above to the evolution of COVID-19, a far more accurate epidemic dynamical model named GHR is obtained. This paper finds that there is another symmetry-breaking process generated by the national large-scale intervention of COVID-19, in addition to the symmetry-breaking due to the virus modeled by the SEIR model. We present three key order parameters of the national intervention process: governing force (G), healing force (H), and rescue force (R) to establish the GHR model, which is accurately supported by the epidemic data. The interaction between the three levels of ‘order parameters - conversion rate - population numbers’ in the spread of the epidemic is revealed by comparing the evolution of the epidemic in China and abroad in detail.

Further, a Logistic model of the crude mortality is derived from the GHR model and validated in the whole-cycle mortality data of the first wave across 52 countries. Two independent processes of the complex mortality evolution are decoupled by two model parameters, leading to two conclusions with practical applications. On the one hand, this paper finds a linear law between the ICU duration (τ) of non-survivors at the early stage and the local epidemic duration with a ratio of approximately 7, which is an important feature of COVID-19. And if correct, one would be able to make accurate predictions of the epidemic duration based on the clinical data from the ICU at the early stage. On the other hand, the saturation mortality rate (m_0), which determined the total deaths at the late stage, obeyed two power-law with the median age and the bed occupancy respectively, quantitatively explaining the reasons for the magnitude differences in mortality across countries. And from this, the conclusion was reached that about 36% of deaths could be avoided if the number of hospital beds in older countries (median age >38 years) were doubled. Therefore, the study provides a quantitative basis for preparing medical resources for the next wave of the epidemic.

For the human pulse wave system, this paper hypothesizes that the human pulse wave system forms an individualized ‘normal state’ during the long-term evolution based on the symmetry principle, while new symmetry breakdowns occur continuously under internal and external effects, resulting in deviations from the normal state. Thus, the key order parameter ‘deviation’ was developed to quantitatively describe changes in individual health status. At the same time, this paper constructs a ‘human order parameters phase space’ based on the basic pulse wave parameters, which are used to classify subcategories and calculate the ‘deviation’ for sub-healthy people. Therefore, a quantitative model is constructed which is in line with the principle of ‘knowing constant to achieve change’ in Traditional Chinese Medicine, breaking through the limitations of the traditional statistical averaging methods.

Further, the order parameters model of the pulse wave is applied to describe the individual's normal health index and daily health index, showing a more accurate description than results of the traditional machine learning method. In addition, this model framework was also successfully applied to describe other human physiological signals (e.g., GDV signal). These results show that human physiological signals are highly structured in the order parameters phase space, which provides a new perspective for developing the machine learning techniques incorporating medical experience and knowledge.

In summary, this thesis develops an order parameter theory of the human body based on the ‘single-centered, two-sided, multi-dimensional, multi-level’ philosophy of complex human system. The theory can quantitatively characterize the self-organizing behavior of human systems, laying a foundation for revealing the mathematical principles that govern the state of human systems and discovering the key variables and universal constants by applying the theory from population epidemic evolution to individual pulse wave analysis.






KEY WORDS: Complex Systems, Human Body System, Order Parameters, COVID-19, Pulse Wave Analysis
